Tell me a little bit about the history of this library.
They say this is one of the oldest continuous libraries in the world.
Yes, one of the oldest preserved from the region until now.
This is beautiful.
The original door, good and good.
The original door, the date.
1454.
Wow.
And that says 1454.
August 15.
Mm-hmm.
And the name of the craftsman who made the door, Christophorov, from St.
John and Pesticheto, which is a little town near Bologna.
But the name of the architect is Master Muzi.
May I take a photograph?
I understand, that's why I asked.
We have a postcard if you want.
That's fine.
What is the elephant?
The elephant was a symbol of the Malatesta family.
This is a form of the Malatesta family.
Yes, Domenico.
Domenico, whose name was also Novello, was the brother of Sigismondo, who was the lord of the ring.
So this was a private library?
This was a family library?
No, not exactly.
It was a library built in a consistent common.
by the law of the city but it was not a family library but a sort of public library in the sense in which we
we do to the public library in 15th century, in a particular sense, not a real public library, but a library open to the public.
to scholars.
Yes, humanistic library in which were religious work, father of the church, but classics.
Latin and Greek classics.
the Latin, some of the Greek classics in Latin version.
But also some Greek classics in Greek.
And where did they acquire these?
Did they buy them?
Where did they get the books?
No, a part was written
for Nala Testa Novella in a scriptorium who was probably in the library or in the monastery in the convent.
The part was a mistake was
And it is still, I know if there are other people here, it is still a working library.
Now, today, yes, it's a public library of the city of Cesena.
That's amazing.
A real public library there is only from the beginning of the 19th century, not before.
It's a public library in the city.
What is the wood on the floor?
That's okay, I'm just curious.
That's okay.
Now they are...
All things are original.
The death in pine.
And the readers, is this where the books were kept?
Yes.
And they were chained books too?
No, only some...
Some other books who came in the library after the construction of the library itself.
But we had quite the same books which were in the 15th century.
Not all the books are from 15th century.
There are books older than 15th century.
We have a manuscript from 9th century.
What does that say?
I read the name of Malacresta Mulego, who was a child of Gandolfo and nephew of Malacresta.
And this was put in when the building was built?
Yes, yes.
And what... Yes, 1454.
1454.
So actually 40 years before Columbus discovered the new world.
Yes, 40 years.
Exactly.
You had a lot of readers.
These were all desks for people to read?
Yes.
We don't think that the Malatestiana has a library in which
all desks are full of people in the 15th century.
Before, we had 200 people who can't stay in the library, but... 200 places, yeah.
It's not really.
But there are places for 200 people.
We have a library for one reader or two readers.
many books for a few of readers.
So the reading would be done in this room?
Now... No, no, I know then, but they would read here at these desks.
Where would the light come from?
What kind of light?
No, no, no.
No light?
No light.
So just from the windows?
Yes.
No candles?
My, I think, no, I think the natural light was the light.
Today we haven't light in the library.
And this is a, these are all seals or crests or different crests of Malatesta family.
Malatesta family.
Can we walk down a little?
Yes.
And these books are all original books that are here?
Yes, from 9th to 17th century.
But the big part was in the library when the library was opened.
And there was one floor.
Yes, I don't know exactly
What is the use of the first floor?
It's possible it was the scriptorium.
Down below?
Yes, but we don't know.
What's there now?
Now there is a museum, archaeological museum of Chisenta.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22, 22,
So these are study guests?
Yes, yes.
Now we name them P-L-U-T-E-I.
And what does that mean?
That's okay.
But that's Italian.
A sort of desk.
A sort of study desk.
So the books... There really wasn't room for a lot of books here, though.
The books were kept under here?
The books.
Yes.
They were kept under here?
Or in original?
Yes, yes, yes.
The desk are the same.
But this is where the books were also kept.
Now?
No, no, then.
No, yes, yes.
So how did they have, how were they catalogued?
Did they have a catalog?
Yes, but we not have today the original catalog, because the archive of the Malatestiana family was destroyed at the end of the Signoria Malatestiana, at the end of the 15th century.
The older catalogue we have is a printed catalogue published at the end of 18th century.
Are these the original windows, the glass?
No.
This is the crest of the family maybe?
Yes, one of the crests because we have also the elephant in the door but the... How to say it in English?
This is a protection for the body.
A shield?
A shield.
Was the family noted for studying or study?
Were they scholars, the family?
What did the family get the wealth from?
Do they know?
The Malatesta family?
No, the family finished in 15th century.
Family scholars?
Yes, yes.
But why do you think they were so interested in scholarship?
Do you have any idea why they founded this library?
Why did the Malatestas create such a beautiful library?
Imitation of other families, Medici.
Did they try to imitate them also in the greatness of the books?
Magnificent books?
The Medician Library in Florence was... The best, yes.
The greatest.
And also the architecture was... Michelangelo?
No, no, no.
Before Michelangelo.
Michelotto.
The library of the Medici family was built before Michelangelo.
Some years before the Malatestiana, and also in a convent, and some years before, in 1447, 1446.
But it is not a library until now.
So that's why this is the oldest, the one Michelangelo did, replaced the first one.
How many books and manuscripts?
Can you give me an idea of the numbers, the size of the library, the books?
Now, 341 manuscripts and 40 printed books.
In here?
Yes.
In original, some less, but the red part was in the library in the 15th century.
And what would you say are some of the high spots, the jewels of the collection?
What are some of your favorite items in here?
My?
Yes.
My books, the manuscript books that are some of your favorites.
Ah, favorite.
But it's difficult to say because we have interesting manuscripts for the age.
as the Isidolo di Siviglia which was of 9th century.
You have a 9th century?
Yes, etymologiae by Isidolo di Siviglia.
But for the picture the more interesting are the
Malapestian codici written and illuminated for Malapestanovello.
This was built with... Is that like an eastern exposure, west?
To south.
South?
North?
So the windows are east and the west.
So you get maximum sunlight coming this way.
Can you show us a couple of books by chance?
Yes.
Are these books still called for by scholars?
Do scholars come and ask and read any of these books here?
No, no, no, no.
The consultation is in another room.
The room... But you come and get the books here, out there.
They still read these books.
Put my pen away.
Oh, look at that.
This is one of the Malatestian manuscripts, written for Malatestian novella.
Exactly, there are three volumes.
Life by Plutarch.
Plutarch's lives.
Yes.
And this was done here, you think?
This was done for the Meletestas here, perhaps even in this building, you think?
Yes, yes.
They hired the illuminators too?
Yes.
Some life was illuminated with portraits of the people.
Is that dated?
Do you know the date on this?
Do you know the date, the year on this?
The date, not exactly, but...
Perhaps 40, 48, 47, 48.
Your condition looks wonderful, the condition of the book.
Not exactly, but the condition was the same, are the same from the beginning of the library and then there is the adaptation of books and the condition.
There is a lot of wet in the room.
in the winter, but also in the other seasons.
So, you don't have any environmental controls in here for these books?
Yes, instruments.
Are they?
Oh, yes.
No, but we have... We name them thermo-hygrometry, thermo-hydrography.
instruments to control temperature and humidity.
And you have them in here.
So there are instruments?
On some desks.
Oh good.
This is a wonderful portrait of Johnny Caesar.
Oh that is pretty good.
And the life was translated by Guarino Veronese from Greek of Plutarch.
That is beautiful.
That must be beautiful.
And it's influenced by Pisanello.
The art now you're talking about.
And that's Lapis, that must be Lapis.
the blue leprisizer?
Not as color as the other, mineral, but I don't know from which kind of mineral.
It's a beautiful calligraphy.
Humanistic.
And this is in three volumes, you said, right?
And this is... It's beautiful.
This is the life of Caesar.
Yes.
And now we have other life and other portraits, Arthasert.
Who is that?
Arthasert.
King of the first time.
Oh, Jepsi, that's who that is.
Beautiful.
Yeah.
I wonder how long something like this took to make?
A lot of time.
Two or four sheets in a day.
Feet?
Two or four sheets.
sheet in a day.
And then to make a manuscript of 400 pages, 100 or 200 days were to written, only to written, but this
Patchman was prepared before and then the artist... And then they would leave space for the illuminations.
And they also worked in several colors as well.
It's magnificent.
So they hired their own... The scriptorium was down in the basement, that's correct.
Maybe it was.
All the Patchman was from younger...
Look at Socrates.
He was like a Franciscan.
He looks like a Franciscan monk, right?
Yes.
Oh, that's great.
But the library was in a Franciscan convent and then it's normal.
But that is very good evidence that it was done by people here, too.
If you're looking for evidence that it was done here, that's very good internal evidence.
He's got a beard.
He's got a skull cap and a cloak.
Socrates, that's great.
Okay.
It's beautiful.
Is it all one hand, do you think?
Is it all one hand?
This book, yes.
Really?
Only one hand.
And I think it's Jacopo della Pergola.
Could you spell his name?
Who didn't see this book, but we know his calligraphy.
Jacopo.
J-A-C-O-P-O?
Yes, from Pergola, which is a little town near Ancona.
P-E-R-G-A?
P-E-R-G-O-L-A.
Is he a famous calligrapher?
For Malatestian books.
We don't know who the artists are, of course.
We don't know.
Do we know who the artists are?
No.
No, it's more difficult to know the artists like the copyists.
Because sometimes copyists sing their work but not the artists.
When a reader came here and he read, was he able to take notes?
Do you think they took notes?
It's possible.
In the 15th century, the habit to read and read them contemporary was beginning.
So there is sufficient light.
You can see the windows are aligned
When you're sitting down the light is good, better than standing up, so the light... Some buildings were not in 15th century in that area.
In fact, we have less light than in the other.
You'd call this leaded glass?
I wonder if the glass is fabricated originally?
We don't know which kind, because the first representation of the library is in the
engrave the plates which are in the printed catalogue in 18th century.
1775, 1776.
So 200 years afterwards.
That's the first representation that comes to today.
Yes.
We haven't before 18th century.
And I imagine when the sun is out, the light is much better, too.
Yes, it is wonderful.
That was wonderful.
Thank you.
Yes.
The condition here, I have to say, we were up at Durham Cathedral.
We were at Durham Cathedral in England a few days ago and at Hereford.
Your condition is much better.
Because perhaps the conditions in Italy are better than in England.
I just want to count the number of windows.
But it's a bit wet.
The humidity.
I'm just counting the windows.
What would you call the architecture?
From Renaissance but with the influence of Gothic.
And what is this material here?
Not a model.
That's okay.
That's fine.
And this is the walls.
The color.
The material is... I think it was painted.
I think it was painted blue.
The color is the original color, which was replaced...
In 1926, after a restoration, who take off the white picture which was posed before and we really don't know when.
And the Michelotto Library in Florence in this period had the same call.
Recently we are here two scholar
from Florence's superintendent who studied the original color of the library of Cosimo de' Medici.
They saw that the color is quite the same on the Malapestiano.
The same kind of green color on the Malapestiano.
Could you show us another book on this side, just so I can feel the light coming from the other side?
Would that be possible?
Could you show us another book?
On this area, yes.
Classic in what respect, Doctor?
Classic for the ornaments.
Look at this little animal.
These are the initial of the name of Malatesta Novella.
So this is done for him.
And that ornament here is Malatesta Novella.
What is this book, the subject of this book?
Look at that, beautiful.
I think it's the Sermon of the Sermon Ambrosius.
Sermon Ambrosius.
Yes.
Is Sermon Ambrosius the person for whom you named the Ambrosiana?
How is he relevant to Milan?
Yes, he's the protector of Milan.
The first bishop, perhaps, or one of the first bishops of Milan in 4th century.
When printed books started to come in, this library... Was built.
Yes, in the same year in which Gutenberg printed the 42 lines.
Same year, 1450.
Yes.
And so then, a few years later, Parnatz, they go to Subiaco, they bring the press in.
Yes, before.
Subiaco was in 1465.
So within 15 years, there were printed books.
What was the attitude here?
Do you think that they opposed printed books or do you think... No, because the Malatestiana, the Malatestiana family, finished when, exactly the year in which Schweineheim e Panos print, in 1465.
November 20, 1465.
Malapesta Novello died.
And contemporary Schweinheim and Panels printed their books on Subyacna.
He was the last one?
He was the last one at least then?
Yes.
And so then were there any books added after that?
Some books but issued by the common by the Franciscans.
So who
Who took over the library after the death of Malatesta?
The convent and the city, the town, because Malatesta Novello decided that the library was administrated by the convent and by the municipality.
Do you have a sense of why this has survived to be the oldest and so many others didn't?
How did it happen that this is now the oldest library?
Because it is in a little town.
outside of some events like war because Cesena
returned in the pontifical state, in the state of church, and remained under the Pope until 1861, until the rise of the Italian state.
So there was very little, I don't want to use the word violence, but there was no conflict here.
Fortunately not, but some conflict between the convent and the city
they were sometimes, but they not make some damage in the library.
Great story.
It opens the year, the Gutenberg invents type.
Yes, yes.
They acquire manuscripts and then for 15 years, and what were the dates again?
You said November?
Yeah, November 20.
Manataste 1465.
Manataste dies.
So that's the same year.
But the press is set up as subiaco.
Yes.
In November, Svani and Japan, where, where, yes.
That's wonderful.
It's great, it's perfect.
I think perhaps Malatesta Novello never, never saw, didn't see a printed book.
It's possible.
I wonder if he even knew what it was, you know.
Because in Italy we say that only
Bessarion and Nikolaus of Kuz, no new printed books.
Say that again.
Would you say that again?
We say only Kuz?
Bessarion.
P-E-S-S-S-A-R
I-O-M.
Bessire.
Bessire and Nicholas of Cousa.
Cousa.
C-U-S-A.
And who were they?
Two cardinals.
Oh, cardinals.
Bessire is the Greek cardinal.
We took a great library, a great Greek library in Italy.
A part of it was now in the Marciano Library in Venice.
Which we're going to Monday.
He took the Greek library from where?
Constantinople?
Yes, from Trebizond.
Trebizond.
Now in Turkey, but... So when the Muslims were taking over, he fled with the books.
In Venice, certainly, surely you will see... We went there yesterday.
A great imprint of Bessariam.
Is that Marciano?
Yes.
He brought, he invited them.
It's possible, it's possible.
But he was Greek.
Yes.
of heritage and merit.
Our background is Greek-American.
Ah!
We have some Greek manuscripts.
Really?
Yes, 14 Greek manuscripts.
And how do you suppose you get them?
Both directly by Malatesta Novella.
but not copied because in italy few people know the greek characters but i wonder why he bought it if very few people could read it i wonder who he bought it when i wonder who he bought those greek manuscripts why he bought them because some people can read
The library was not only for Malatetta Novello and his family, but for scholars and humanistic people.
Can you think of the names of any great scholars through history who have come here to study?
Paolo Manuzio.
from Biondo Flavio, F-M-A-D-I-A.
Oh, Pietro Ben, if possible.
And Piraccio Lupezia Borgia.
Are there any great universities nearby here?
In the 15th century?
Yes.
No, no.
There was a studium in the convent, a little scoot, but not a university or not.
See, so many great, like the Capitulario in Verona had the cathedral there next door.
There's always a reason why a library... This one is a family.
There's not a university, there's not a church, there's just one family.
That's the reason why this library was established, I think.
To, as I said, to emulate other family in Italian Renaissance.
But also because Maladesca Novello,
whose family was warriors was not loved not were but studies literature intellectuals yes they were they were not intellectuals yes but his family no
father, grandfather, brother, were warriors, were involved in war.
And he had no heirs, he had no sons?
When he died, you said the family died out?
No, no, no, without sons.
So that was the end of the line?
Yes.
It'd be a pretty interesting one with Czechoslovak, wouldn't it?
Do they have anything written on him?
Do they write any books?
Could we get some material on him that would help me?
Yes, yes.
We have a postcard of the library and of books.
A little guide about the library and two posters.
and a reproduction on a special kind of paper of this portrait of St.
Augustine.
St.
We have a reproduction of this.
That is St.
Augustine.
And what is the name?
Francisca Monge.
And this is a classic malefist.
Yes, malefist.
Italian Renaissance manuscript, because this, how to say, the fact which is around the portrait, the picture, we named it
Cornice a bianchi girari.
The design.
Yes.
Great.
Very lovely.
In Italian, the word girare is going around.
So how do you spell it?
Girari.
G-E-R.
R-A-R-I.
Girari.
Yes.
go around.
That's lovely.
And what is this little decoration here?
Codivine.
That's Saint Augustine, looking up to heaven, to God.
Look at the Christ, the maple.
Oh, the Christ.
To give the perspectives and... That's so much of it.
Do you have a little history of the library and of the Malatesta that we could purchase that would tell us, give us some background about him, some information?
Taking from which... A bookstore.
A book, something, yeah, that would give me some... We could buy a book.
A biography or something, or something written about...
Some information you will find in the little guide I noticed before.
There are other books but actually unfortunately they are not in
I'm not for buying now because the edition has finished.
There are no examples in circulation now.
That's wonderful.
That's beautiful.
The letters here.
What does this say coming down here, Linda?
The letters.
Quo di modo?
Audio in line.
Do you have an idea of when this was done, this also in the 1400s?
Yes, yes.
That's magnificent.
Yes.
We had the name of the artist who was the French man, Jean de Finale.
Jean de Pinal.
And what are those initials there?
Yes, Epinal is a little town.
So in French it is Jean?
Jean de Pinal.
Here in A.L.
Yes.
It is the part, yes.
Does he have a year there?
No, unfortunately not.
No, there are 125 sermons by St.
Augustine.
But there isn't a year.
between 1447 and 1465, when Maragel Fonagaro died.
So you think this was done in France or here?
No, no, here.
He lived here.
He married a woman from Cesena.
So you know about his life then?
From Arcade, nothing like that.
Ioannis, Antoni, Vespino.
And it says Deo gratias.
What does that mean, Deo gratias?
We say thank you to our Lord.
Thank God.
That's great.
They had a commentary by Sant'Agostino in Gospel of St.
John.
Doctor, when I come to write about this, can I email you or fax you some of the material so you can check it to see if I have it right?
Yes.
Some of these spellings and some of these dates.
That way you can read it and check it and make sure it's right too.
I'd like to do that, if you don't mind.
It'll be a while.
In other words, when I've written about this library, I'll send it to you.
Yes.
I remain in Chisena only too long, because I go to another direction of the library in Rome.
Do you know where you wrote it?
Can you tell me where you're going so we can stay in touch?
By email?
Yes.
Okay.
I'll send you an email when I get back and remind you.
So you're going to Loma?
I came from Loma.
How long have you been here?
Eight years.
So this whole library existed for just 241 manuscripts.
You said there were 241... 341.
341.
This whole library was built just for 341 manuscripts.
That tells you how precious the books were, right?
Yes.
A lot of them.
Was that enough?
Was that about white in those days?
Was that a great library 500 years ago?
No, not exactly a great library, but a medium library.
Sure for the quality.
That's great.
That's wonderful.
How many people come to see this?
Seven thousand million a year.
Seven thousand people a year.
That's a lot.
Nice choice.
And when this was built, there were no other buildings, this was the only building right here?
No, the Franciscan complex was the only one.
Oh, look at this.
I understand.